User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction (2024) 34:691–728
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-023-09379-6
Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based
models
Josef Bauer 1 · Dietmar Jannach 1
Received: 28 December 2022 / Accepted in revised form: 27 July 2023 / Published online: 6 October 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Session-based recommender systems model the interests of users based on their brows-
ing behavior with the goal of making suitable item suggestions in an ongoing usage
session. Most existing work in this growing research area make only use of the
most recent observed interactions for each user, and they typically solely rely on
user–item interaction data (e.g., click events) for interest modeling. Thus, they do
not leverage important forms of other information which are commonly available in
practical settings. In this work, we therefore propose a hybrid approach for person-
alized session-based ( “session-aware”) recommendation, which (i) is able to take
into account various types of side information as model features and which (ii) can
be combined with existing session-based (or session-aware) recommendation mod-
els. Technically, our approach is based on stacking several session-based modeling
approaches with efﬁcient machine learning methods for tabular data, in our case using
Gradient Boosting Machines (GBMs). We successfully evaluated our approach (named
HySAR) on two public e-commerce datasets. Speciﬁcally, we also demonstrate the
effectiveness of a number of novel model features that we engineered in the course of
this research. These features, which were mostly unexplored in previous works, relate
to various types of information related to the users, their actions, the items, as well
as contextual session characteristics. Different existing recommendation approaches
and further problem speciﬁc features can be easily added in our generic method to
improve recommendations.
Keywords Recommender systems · Session-based recommendation · Hybrid
approaches · Tabular data
B Josef Bauer
josef.b.bauer@gmail.com
Dietmar Jannach
dietmar.jannach@aau.at
1 University of Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria
123

692 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
1 Introduction
Recommender Systems are decision support systems with the purpose of helping users
ﬁnding items that are relevant to them within a rich set of options. These systems are
nowadays part of many modern online services, e.g., on e-commerce or media stream-
ing sites, where they often create substantial business value for providers (Jannach
and Jugovac 2019). Traditionally, recommender systems were designed to model only
long-term preference of users. In session-based recommendation scenarios, in con-
trast, the goal is to make item suggestions during an ongoing shopping or browsing
session. In such situations, short-term intents and user needs have to be estimated
from the interactions of the current session and are often much more important than
long-term preferences (Jannach et al. 2017, 2021; Quadrana et al. 2018; Wang et al.
2021).
Being able to make accurate session-based recommendations using only a few
recent observed interactions is a highly relevant problem in practice. In e-commerce
settings, for example, many shop visitors might be entirely anonymous, either because
they are new customers or because they or not logged in. In such cases, no long-term
preference information is available at all. But even in cases the customer is already
known and logged in, it often is highly important to make recommendations that
match the user’s current short-term shopping intents, which may change from session
to session (Jannach et al. 2017). Due to the practical relevance of the problem, various
technical approaches were proposed in the past few years not only in the area of e-
commerce, but also for several other application domains such as music, news, or
movies (Garcin et al. 2013; Hidasi et al. 2016a; Kouki et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2018;R e n
et al. 2019; Shani et al. 2005).
Session-based recommendation techniques date back more than twenty years, see,
e.g., Mobasher et al. ( 2002) for an early work. Research interest in the area however
only grew substantially after the ACM RecSys Challenge in 2015 (Ben-Shimon et al.
2015). In the context of this challenge a large dataset of anonymous shopping sessions
was released, which contained click events collected from an online retailer. While
the availability of this and similar datasets strongly fueled research in this area, the
information in such datasets is in many cases limited to certain types of recorded
interactions between online users and items, in particular view and purchase events.
As a result, the majority of published research in session-based recommendations is
focused on developing models that solely rely on this type ofcollaborative information.
In practice, in contrast, additional information about the items, e.g., meta-data or
the actual content in case of media items, is almost always available. In traditional rec-
ommendation scenarios, a large number of hybrid techniques were proposed during
the last three decades (Burke 2002). Such techniques usually combine collabora-
tive and content-based approaches for improved recommendations. V ery commonly,
such hybrids were designed for user cold-start situations, i.e., situations where lit-
tle is known about the users. User cold start is in fact the central characteristic of
session-based recommendation problems. Nonetheless, research on content-based or
hybrid session-based recommendation techniques is still comparably limited today.
This seems surprising, in particular as studies like (Jannach et al. 2017) indicate that
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 693
even simple heuristics like recommending items from the same category as the last
viewed one can be helpful in an e-commerce shop.
Examples of works that try to combine different types of information in hybrid
session-based recommenders include (Gabriel et al. 2019) or (Hidasi et al. 2016b),
which rely on images, textual data, or category information for improved recommen-
dations. Often however, only one or a few types of side information are considered in
such approaches. Moreover, the integration of side information into complex session-
based recommendation models can be challenging, leading to a technical integration
approach that is tailored to the speciﬁc model that operates on the basis of collaborative
information, e.g., a particular recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture.
In terms of combining long-term preference models with the most recently observed
interactions, only a few works were proposed in the last years, e.g., Liang et al. (2018);
Phuong et al. (2019); Quadrana et al. ( 2017); Ruocco et al. ( 2017); Ying et al. (2018).
However, a recent study (Latiﬁ et al. 2021) showed that these personalized session-
based (or: “session-aware”) methods are actually not effective in incorporating long-
term preference signals, and can be outperformed by purely session-based techniques,
which do not make use of the available long-term information about users.
In this work, we therefore propose an approach to leverage long-term preference
information and different types of side information in a generic approach to session-
aware recommendation settings. Speciﬁcally, our approach has two phases. In the
ﬁrst phase, a set of items is pre-selected and scored using one or more baseline item
rankings. Such baseline rankings can be done solely based on collaborative informa-
tion and existing (content-agnostic) session-based recommendation techniques like
GRU4Rec (Hidasi et al. 2016a). In the second phase, we integrate the baseline scores
with engineered features, which—among other aspects—capture long-term prefer-
ence information. We do this by formulating the problem in such a way that efﬁcient
machine learning methods for tabular data—in our case Gradient Boosting Machines
(GBMs)—can be used.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for the e-commerce domain.
Experiments with two public datasets that contain item meta-data show that the incor-
poration of side information and long-term preference information with our approach
helps to signiﬁcantly increase prediction accuracy. In this context, we also evaluate a
variety of features that have not been previously explored in the context of session-
aware recommendation in e-commerce. Most of the features that were engineered in
our generic approach are general and could be used for other e-commerce datasets or
related applications. We analyze the importance of these features based on Shapley
values, which also allows us to address interpretability aspects. To ensure reproducibil-
ity, we share the source code and links to the datasets used in our experiments online.
1
While our experiments so far are limited to the e-commerce domain, we emphasize
that our overall method is generic and not tied to a particular domain.
We organize the paper as follows. After reviewing previous work in Sect.2,w ei n t r o -
duce the problem setting and general technical solution approach in Sect. 3. Details of
our method are described in Sect. 4. The experimental results are reported in Sect. 5,
1 https://github.com/jo-bauer/hysar .
123

694 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
followed by a feature analysis in Sect. 6 and an ablation study in Sect. 7. The paper
ends with a discussion of our ﬁndings and an outlook on future works.
2 Background and related work
According to Quadrana et al. ( 2018), session-based recommendation can be seen as
a subclass of the more general class of sequence-aware recommendation problems.
Speciﬁcally, the authors of Quadrana et al. (2018) differentiate between the following
problem classes:
– Session- based recommendation, where users are anonymous and we only know
the interactions of a user in the ongoing session.
– Session- aware recommendation, where the data is also organized in sessions, but
users are not anonymous and we additionally have knowledge about previous ses-
sions of the current user. This is the focus of our present work. However, we want
to point out that our approach can also be used for pure session- based recom-
mendation, simply by not incorporating any features that depend on speciﬁc user
information, as will become clear in Sect. 4.3.
– Sequential recommendation, where users are also not anonymous and interactions
are also time-ordered, but the interactions are not organized in sessions. Recent
examples of such approaches include Bert4REC (Sun et al. 2019)o rS A S R e c
(Kang and McAuley 2018).
Overall, while these approaches operate on different types of data, they share the
common goal, namely the recommendation of items that are expected to match the
current or latest intents, needs, or interests of the user. Amazon.com’s “Customers who
bought …also bought” feature could be seen as a very simple implementation of such
an approach, which is non-personalized and only takes the last user interaction into
account. A multitude of more elaborate methods were proposed over the years, which,
from a machine learning perspective, aim to predict a user’s next interaction with an
item given a sequence of past interactions. In an early work, Mobasher et al. ( 2002),
for example, used sequential patterns to make next-page browsing recommendations.
Later, Shani et al. ( 2005) viewed recommendation as a sequential optimization prob-
lem and modeled user sessions as Markov decision processes. At around the same
time, Ragno et al. ( 2005) explored an approach for session-based music recommen-
dation based on item similarities. Music recommendation was also the focus of Hariri
et al. ( 2012), who relied on collaborative information and a nearest-neighbor tech-
nique in combination with latent topic information. A more complex model for music
recommendation based on metric embedding was proposed in Chen et al. ( 2012).
Up to about the year 2015, the literature on session-based recommendation was
rather sparse, with some research published on non-public datasets from time to time,
e.g., Garcin et al. ( 2013); Jannach et al. ( 2015); Tavakol and Brefeld ( 2014a). Since
2015, however, a large number of technical approaches for session-based recommen-
dation were published, see (Wang et al. 2021) for a recent survey. This development
was fueled both by the availability of public datasets and the general boom in deep
learning for recommender systems that started at this time. GRU4Rec was probably
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 695
the ﬁrst neural recommendation method designed speciﬁcally for session-based rec-
ommendation (Hidasi et al. 2016a). This widely known method is based on an adapted
recurrent neural network architecture that relies on Gated Recurrent Units that were
introduced a year before and which, among other aspects, help avoid the problem
of vanishing gradients. Several improvements were later suggested for GRU4Rec,
including alternative loss functions that have shown to lead to signiﬁcantly better
performance. Since then, various other types of neural network architectures were
considered for session-based recommendation, including combinations of RNNs with
attention layers, convolutional layers, memory networks, graph neural networks or
variational autoencoders, e.g., Li et al. (2017); Liu et al. (2018); Sachdeva et al. (2019);
Wang et al. (2019); Wu et al. ( 2019); Y u et al. (2020); Y uan et al. (2019).
In the method proposed in this work, any of these complex models can be used in
the ﬁrst phase, which has the goal to make a pre-selection of relevant items. In our
experiments evaluation, see Sect. 5, we try out two alternative methods from different
families of approaches. First, we use the latest version of GRU4Rec, which is widely
used and which we found to be still very competitive in a recent performance evaluation
(Ludewig et al. 2021). In addition, we run experiments in which we use a session-
based nearest-neighbor method (S-SKNN) for item pre-selection. Again, according to
previous work, such methods despite their conceptual simplicity often lead to highly
competitive results, and in many cases they even outperform more complex neural
models, cf. Ludewig et al. ( 2021).
Notable works on session-aware recommendation techniques started to appear
around 2017. In Quadrana et al. ( 2017), the authors built upon the GRU4Rec system
and trained two recurrent neural networks, where one GRU layer is used to model the
current session and the other one models the user information across sessions. A simi-
lar RNN-based approach was proposed in Ruocco et al. (2017). The work described in
Jannach et al. ( 2017), in contrast, is based on a two-phase reranking approach similar
to our present work.
2 There, a session-based technique based on nearest neighbors
is used to pre-select a set of candidate items. In the second phase, various prediction
features were engineered, and a neural network architecture ﬁnally was found to be
the most effective method to combine the features in the prediction process. Ying et al.
(2018) later on proposed a neural model that relies on two-layer hierarchical attention
network. In this model, the ﬁrst layer learns long-term user preferences and the second
layer combines this model with the embeddings of the items of the current session.
Differently from that, the NCSF method proposed in Liang et al. ( 2018) combines
three components, a historical session encoder, an encoder for the current session,
and a joint-context encoder to combine the different components. In Phuong et al.
(2019), ﬁnally, also RNNs are used to model short-term and long-term models, and
different ways are proposed to combine the models, e.g., with a gating mechanisms
that allows to make the contribution of each component ﬁxed or adaptive. Overall,
2 Reranking techniques are widely used in the recommender systems literature, e.g., to increase the diversity
of item lists or to combine various models, e.g., in the context of similar-item recommendations (Adomavi-
cius and Kwon 2011; Sánchez et al. 2020). Note that our method uses the selected items of several (in
our experiments two) baseline recommender methods and incorporates their predicted ranks as features
among many other types of features. It can therefore be considered as an ensembling approach rather than
a reranking of one algorithm, although it can be used with just one baseline recommender as well.
123

696 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
however, while various neural models were proposed in recent years, a recent study
in Latiﬁ et al. ( 2021) as mentioned above indicated that these models are actually
not very effective. For example, the latest version of GRU4Rec turned out to be more
effective than combining two GRU4Rec models as proposed in Quadrana et al. (2017).
Moreover, session-based nearest neighbor methods were consistently better than all
session-aware methods discussed here. In our present work, we therefore do not com-
pare our proposed method with these models but only with methods for session-based
recommendation.
The session-based and session-aware methods discussed so far are purely collab-
orative and do not rely on any side information. An earlier, non-neural approach that
does rely on side information for e-commerce recommendations was proposed in
Tavakol and Brefeld ( 2014b). Technically, their approach relies on factored Markov
decision processes. Regarding the used side information, the approach is primarily
focused on topic (category) detection, which is then used for recommendation. Since
the state space can become very big, its applicability to huge datasets is however lim-
ited. An early deep learning approach that considers side information is presented in
H i d a s ie ta l .(2016b). In their work, Hidasi et al. incorporate image and text data and
tried several parallel RNN architectures. Training a separate RNN for every feature
and combining them in the end however worked best according to their respective
experiments. Differently from our work, the work in Hidasi et al. ( 2016b) is however
somewhat limited in the form of the features that can be taken into account. The work
presented in Song and Lee ( 2018) also uses RNNs and user-based features, but only
static ones. Dynamic features that change over time can not be included because of the
underlying one-hot encoding of categorical features that is used in the approach. Sim-
ilar limitations apply to Phuong et al. ( 2018), which incorporates user-based context
information within RNNs in the form of embeddings, and Zhu et al. ( 2020), which
only uses category information to model user intents. Likewise, Song et al. (2019) only
uses n-gram features of the items, but do not consider other features. In our approach,
in contrast, a multitude of features can be incorporated, in particular dynamic, time-
dependent ones, for example, how the users interact with items and categories in the
current session and in the past.
The method presented in de Souza et al. ( 2019), ﬁnally, is based on a hybrid RNN
method and, like our work, uses more features. The approach is however speciﬁcally
tailored to a certain news recommendation problem. For instance, their architecture
integrates speciﬁc components for natural language processing and the creation of
embeddings for the news items. Moreover, central factors like recency and general
popularity are particularly important in news recommendation scenarios. Our work,
in contrast, mainly focuses on e-commerce applications as well as different features
and methodology.
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 697
3 Overview of the technical approach
3.1 Method overview and encoding example
Many recent approaches to session-aware recommendation and to hybrid session-
based recommendation propose entirely neural architectures, as discussed in Sect. 2.
However, in particular when it comes to modeling long-term preferences and to com-
bining them with short-term user intents, we found that such neural models often
struggle to effectively leverage the available information (Latiﬁ et al. 2021). In this
work, we therefore propose an alternative approach, which (i) leverages the power
of recent (neural and non-neural) methods for session-based recommendation and
(ii) combines the output of these models with long-term preference signals and side
information which we encode in a uniform manner as tabular data.
A particular novelty of our tabular data representation lies in the way we encode
temporal (sequential) information enriched with a huge set of features and augmented
with predictions from session-based recommenders. Besides the design and incor-
poration of novel model features, we also demonstrate that our hybrid ensembling
framework yields higher increases in accuracy than often observed with newly pro-
posed methods. Our ﬁnding suggests that different measures such as enriching various
existing approaches with an extensive set of features capturing additional information
can be more effective to improve performance of session-aware recommenders. This
is an important ﬁnding for future work and for practitioners.
We illustrate our general approach with the following example. In session-based
(and session-aware) recommendation settings, we are given a sequentially ordered log
of recorded user interactions (Quadrana et al. 2018) as an input. Let us assume that
the last session s1 by user u1 in the log looks as follows in simpliﬁed form:
s1(u1) : V 1, A2, V 4, A3, P3, V 12, V 7, A7, P7
where V1 means a recorded item view event for item i1, A2 refers to an add-to-cart
event recorded for i2, P3 is a purchase event for i3 and so on. Table 1 shows a tabular
encoding of this information, extended with side information and engineered features.
The ﬁrst group of columns represent the information about the interactions. The second
group contains possible examples of side information about items (e.g., category and
prices), and the last group of columns shows an example of engineered features that
may also relate to long-term preference information. Here, nb-prev-int might express
how often user u1 has previously interacted with item i1 in earlier sessions.
The data in Table 1 so far represent the observed interactions. To be able to learn
sequential patterns in this tabular representation, we further (virtually)
3 augment the
training data as follows. For each row in the table, we generate additional rows that
represent events in the session that happened after it. Also, the tabular representation
so far only encodes the actual observations from the log data, i.e., when a user has
interacted with an item later in a session. For effective training, we however also
augment further negative observations in our method, items the user did not view.
3 We actually do not generate all these rows as will be discussed later.
123

698 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
Table 1 Possible tabular encoding of session events. The bold column shows the original sequence of item
interactions from the example
SessionID Time User Item Event Category Price … nb-prev-int …
s1 t0 u1 i1 View C1 150 … 3 …
s1 t1 u1 i2 Add-to-cart C2 170 … 2 …
s1 t2 u1 i4 View C1 110 … 0 …
…… … ... …… … … … …
s1 t7 u1 i7 Purchase C3 50 … 4 …
Enriching the training data with all possible items that the user has not interacted with
would usually be too expensive, and selecting a random subset of non-interacted items
might not be too informative. In our method, we therefore apply a novel approach for
data augmentation in this respect. Speciﬁcally, we take the ﬁrst l recommendations
generated by a set of session-based techniques
4, which are trained in a rolling manner,
at a given state of the session, enrich them with many additional features as outlined
below, and correspondingly create additional rows (as negative examples) for the
training dataset. This way, the algorithm can also learn in which cases a baseline
recommendation strategy (e.g., that uses items from similar sessions) fails.
At this stage, we are now able to create the actual data in the format that is used
for learning. In our present work we focus mainly on learning the most signiﬁcant
positive events in the data—which are add-to-cart and purchase events—, and we
collapse these actions into a target label, which can be true or false. However, in
addition we also consider the case where views are the positive examples, which is the
common approach in the literature.
The ﬁnal data in the form that will be used for model training by our second phase
method will look like the example in Table2. Before we go into details on the reasoning
of how to generate the ﬁnal form of data and speciﬁc examples, we want to provide a
high-level overview to make our approach clearer. Speciﬁcally,
– We consider certain points in time for each session and all additional features are
calculated with respect to the corresponding times. E.g., when the “current” time
is 10 min after the start of the session, various features measure the user behavior
and other aspects in these 10 min of the current session as well as the sessions
before. Note that for model training, the term “current” refers to the considered
point in time in the past.
– Based on the considered “current” times from the previous bullet point, the task is
to predict what a user will do in the remainder of these sessions, after these times.
– Many potential “future items” are considered, which each user might interact with
in the remainder of the session, after the considered point in time.
–T h e positive examples of future items are the actually viewed items for the view
prediction problem and the actual add-to-cart and purchase events for the add-to-
cart/purchase prediction problem. However, only those that were selected by the
ﬁrst phase session-based baseline recommenders as potentially relevant items are
4 In our experiments, we used two different session-based baseline approaches, GRU4Rec and S-SKNN.
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 699
Table 2 Augmented tabular encoding with one row for each future candidate item to be predicted, for a
given time t2 of session s1. The bold column shows examples of potentially relevant future items
S-ID Time FutItem FutEvent Target CurrCat FutCat SameCat PriceDiff …
s1 t2 i12 View 0 C1 C1 True − 10 …
s1 t2 i3 Purchase 1 C1 C1 True 20 …
s1 t2 i10 Non-view 0 C1 C3 False 50 …
retained (i.e., being among the top l predicted items, as described above). This is
done because in production we also only have such predictions available.
–T h e negative examples of future items are the ones predicted by the ﬁrst phase
session-based baseline recommenders which were not viewed afterwards. Addi-
tionally, for the main add-to-cart/purchase prediction problem also theactual items
that were only viewed but not added or purchased afterwards are used as negative
examples for the training.
– This means that for every such considered current point in time, we have one
additional training data row for every positive and negative example based on
events that happened after that point in time. And we have many additional columns
that represent various features, including the ﬁrst phase recommender predictions
for view or add-to-cart/purchase relevance. The features related to the items and
their attributes are mostly calculated with respect to the potentially relevant future
items, which might not be present in the respective users’ history.
Now, we hightlight the aforementioned points by means of an example and provide
more details on the reasoning. Assume we are at t2 in session s1 from the example.
I.e., the current interaction is a view of item i4. Based on the observations seen so
far (V 1, A2, V 4), a session-based recommender returns the following top- l items as
recommendations: i12, i3, i10.
5 These items from the session-based recommender
(or several of those) form the set of future items to be scored by our second phase
GBM approach. I.e., on the one hand, a ﬁlter is applied in the end so that only those
items are retained as positive and negative examples which are included in a baseline
recommender. On the other hand, all items generated by the session-based baseline
recommendation approach which were not observed in the remainder of the session
are added as additional negative examples, labeled “Non-views”. In our example,
this means that i10 is added as additional negative example, since it is included in
the baseline recommendations, but without any interaction in the remainder of the
session. On the other hand, i7 is discarded for model building, even though there
was an actual purchase event later in the session. This is done because we have no
baseline rank in such cases, therefore the model could simply learn that a missing
rank results in a purchase. And in production we also have only those items to score
which a baseline recommender (or any other strategy for preliminary item selection)
generated. We also tested an imputation of the rank, by using default values for items
5 We assume that the items are given in this ranking order by the baseline recommender (we restrict
to just one baseline recommender and a few items for illustration purposes). The ranks of the baseline
recommenders are in fact provided as additional feature columns, which we omitted for space reasons in
Table 2.
123

700 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
not included in the baseline recommenders for training. However, this did not result in
increased performance. A possible explanation is the fact that in this case the model is
trained with additional data not present in the validation and test sets. Thus, patterns
are learned which are no longer present after training, since this information can not
be supplied in production.
New features are then generated in a similar form to the ones in Table 1, but with
respect to the future items to be predicted. This is illustrated in Table 2. The column
“FutEvent” is the base for generating the target. I.e., for future events which are views
or non-views the target is 0, otherwise it is 1 (of course, FutEvent is like the Target
not included as a feature). The column “ CurrCat” is the currently viewed category. It
has therefore the same value in all rows for time t2 for the given user u1 in session s1
and corresponds to the category C1 of the viewed item i4a t t2, as visible in Table 1.
The column “ FutCat” corresponds to the category of the future item candidates for
a recommendation. Therefore, the values depend on item attributes which might not
be present in user u1’s history. From item metadata (not depicted), we obtain the
category values C1 for items i12 and i3, and C3 for item i10. One relevant feature can
be “SameCat” which simply checks whether the category of the candidate future item
to be scored is the same as the currently browsed category. In this case, a purchase
seems to be more likely, as a category interaction often reﬂects the current interest.
Another important feature can be “PriceDiff ”, which measures the difference between
the price of the currently viewed item and the price of the recommendation candidates.
I.e., it indicates how much cheaper or expensive a future recommendation candidate
item is in comparison to the currently viewed one. In our example in Table 2,w e
subtract the price $110 of item i4 with the prices $120, $90 and $60 of items i12,
i3 and i10, respectively. Note that the latter prices can not be read from the example
tables. In fact, most recommendation candidates are items a user never interacted with.
Their prices, which can change in general, have to be calculated from dynamic (time
dependent) item metadata or if this is not available, inferred from the most recent
observations of other users with the same item in the log data.
To summarize, in the example in Table 2 we see that while being cheaper, item i10
is from a different category than the user is browsing and thus maybe less relevant
to his or her current interest. The items i12 and i3 on the other hand are from the
same category as the currently viewed item. And despite the fact that the baseline
recommender judged that i12 has a higher ranking than i3, item i3 is (currently)
cheaper. Therefore, with this additional information, our GBM model trained on this
data can learn that actually i3 has a higher probability of purchase as a recommended
item, because it is a cheaper substitute from the same category and has a resulting
purchase as shown in Table 2.
Note that during training, the columns S-ID, User, FutEvent and Time are not
considered. In the data used in the experiments, time is an absolute time stamp, which
is not too informative. Instead, we include different engineered features like the time
since the start of the session or the number of observed interactions since the session
started.
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 701
The features in our ﬁnal model are mostly more complex than the previously
described ones. But we already saw that we can not simply make use of the interaction
logs directly (as in Table 1, which itself already includes features we engineered). For
instance, for time-based features we have to consider time deltas between features
engineered with respect to the original log data and the future items. In Sect. 3.2 we
provide more details of our algorithmic approach including the feature engineering
based on an example.
3.2 Algorithm outline
In the following, we will outline our algorithmic approach in Algorithm 1 with the
steps starting from preprocessing to model building and generating the outputs. Here,
we limit our descriptions to a speciﬁc example of one additional engineered feature
related to the price sensitivity of a user compared to other users, to have a more concise
representation. For other features, different steps can be required, such as a logic for
a time-based mapping, customized aggregations etc. For example, when calculating
the time since the last and ﬁrst interaction with a target category by a user, one can
not directly use Table 1. In fact, there might have never been any past interaction with
a category of a new item to be recommended to a user and thus no entries in Table 1.
Therefore, we need to check whether there was a past interaction with the new category
in Table 2 for this user in Table 1. And if so, both tables are needed to calculate the
required time statistics, since this has to be done with respect to the current times in
Table 2. The computational principle of combining Tables 1 and 2 with the respective
constraint is shown in Line 19 of Algorithm 1. Note that DT is an abbreviation for
“data table” in the algorithm.
6
Algorithm 1 generates as a partial result in a rolling manner for every point in
time the most recent price sensitivity with respect to the future category of the future
candidate item for which a prediction shall be made (all the other features are omitted
in this example). It also ensures that there is no data leakage. While it would be easier
to calculate the price sensitivity over the whole training set, it would imply that future
training observations are included, which are not yet known at earlier points in time
in the training set.
Using a moving time window approach with such time buckets is based on the
reasoning of providing the most up to date estimates by the baseline recommenders in
the training set, as this will be also the case for production. The time-based split into
training, validation and test was motivated by mimicking the situation in production,
where we train a model on past data beforehand and cache its results. When we
have this model, we in turn deploy and evaluate it on future data. The ﬁnal output
of Algorithm 1 is a list of recommendations sorted by their estimated relevance for
purchase for every session and time of interest.
We want to emphasize that while we gave a speciﬁc example for one generated
feature for illustration purposes, Algorithm1 is a generic approach. The same principle
can be used for other features. Depending on their nature, different constructions might
6 Note that this eventually results in a big table including all features in similar form to Table 2 from the
previous example.
123

702 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
Algorithm 1: Outline of the proposed algorithmic approach with user price sen-
sitivity as an example feature. The approach is generic and other features can be
added with the same principle.
1 Input: A preprocessed session–user–item–interaction records table SessionItemTimeDT (like Table
1).
2 Add category, price and other information (like availability) by joining SessionItemTimeDT with an
item metadata table (in a time-based manner, since some attributes are dynamic and change over
time). Ensure a session, time-based ordering of SessionItemTimeDT.
3 Split the data into k time-based buckets Bi :=
[
ti , ti+1
)
.
4 for every session-based baseline recommender BaseRec do
5 for every time bucket index i ∈ {0, ...,k − 2} do
6 Train BaseRec on the session-log data from SessionItemTimeDT with the time restricted to
Time stamp ∈
[
t0, ti+1
)
, yielding a BaseRecModel.
7 With the trained model BaseRecModel generate session-based predictions and their
respective rankings for all data in SessionItemTimeDT with Time stamp ∈ Bi+1.
8 end
9 end
10 Merge the results of the previous step 4 with SessionItemTimeDT in order to obtain a table
SessionFutureItemTimeDT, storing for every session (with corresponding user) and selected time
stamps a set of top l future candidate items from the session-based baseline recommenders and their
respective rankings.
11 Filter SessionItemTimeDT on add-to-cart and purchase events and calculate with grouping
operations:
12 (i) The cumulative mean of the item prices aggregated just by CategoryID (over all users).
13 (ii) The cumulative mean of the item prices aggregated by CategoryID and UserID.
14 Create a new column “ Relative price sensitivity of the customers for add-to-carts and purchases”
based on the difference:
(iii ) = (i) − (ii ) (1)
15 For the new ﬁeld (iii) of SessionItemTimeDT, carry the last observation forward, to have a value of
the most recent relative price sensitivity for add-to-carts and purchases. This is needed to have values
for view events too (otherwise they would be undeﬁned, as they are calculated on the subset of
add-to-cart and purchase events).
16 Aggregate by UserID, CategoryID and Timestamp to obtain a table including the latest relative
category dependent price sensitivity for every user, named AggUserCatTimeDT.
17 By aggregating the result table UserFutureItemTimeDT from step 10, construct a table with
SessionIDs, Timestamps, future candidate items (FutureItemIDs) and respectively calculated future
categories (FutureCategoryIDs) to be scored, obtained by joining the future item candidates from the
baseline recommenders with metadata for those items. This table is named AggUserFutCatTimeDT.
be needed in the middle part (like from the ﬁltering in Line 11 to the creation of new
ﬁelds in Line 16) of Algorithm 1. E.g., different construction approaches need to be
performed for moving window aggregations or other relevant statistics. Moreover,
different entity-combinations are involved (e.g., some features depend on a user–item
level instead of a category level). But we provide templates covering many cases in
which for example different entities can be speciﬁed and similar features are derived
automatically, making this process easier.
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 703
18 Perform a rolling non-equality join between the result tables 16 and 17 under the conditions that:
19
UserID(AggUserCatT imeDT ) = UserID(AggUser FutCatT imeDT ) (2)
CategoryID(AggUserCatT imeDT ) = FutureCategoryID(AggUser FutCatT imeDT ) (3)
Timestamp(AggUser FutCatT imeDT ) = max(Timestamp(AggUserCatTimeDT)), (4)
such that Timestamp(AggUserCatTimeDT) ≤ Timestamp(AggUserFutCatTimeDT). (5)
20 We add many other features to the resulting table of the previous step, generate other tables for
different entities like the user and the future item, and merge them all together to the table
SessionFutureItemTimeDT, which also contains the predicted ranks by the baseline recommenders
as features.6 After adding the targets, we call this table FeaturesTargetDT. It is of the same form like
the example from Table 2, with more features as columns and all potentially relevant items—for
which add_to_cart/purchase or view probability predictions are made—as additional rows.
21 Split the data in FeaturesTargetDT in a time-based way into training, validation and test sets.
22 for every s ∈ {1, ...,nGBM } do
23 Train a GBM model GBM s on the training data TrainFeaturesTargetDT, with a different seed
than in previous steps, resulting in a different selection of random subsets of training data
examples and random subsets of features.
24 Compute the vector of predicted probabilities ˆy(d)
GBM s based on the trained model GBM s for
d ∈ {train ,v alidation , test }.
25 end
26 Compute ˆy(d)
GBM = favg
({
ˆy(d)
GBM s , s ∈ {1, ...,nGBM }
})
, ensembling the element-wise
probabilities to obtain ﬁnal predicted probabilities. We tested both the mean and median as functions
to combine the predictions of individual models.
27 Join the results given by ˆy(d)
GBM with the IDs of FeaturesTargetDT and group by SessionID,
Timestamp to calculate a ranking based on predicted probabilities for each FutureItemID. These
rankings determine the order of the output recommendation list (a sorted list of FutureItemIDs) for
the given time stamp of a session.
4 Details of the two-phase approach and feature engineering
After having presented an overview of our overall algorithmic method in Sect. 3.2,
in the following we provide the technical details of both phases including the feature
engineering approach.
4.1 First phase recommender methods
The main reason for the use of the ﬁrst phase recommendation algorithms is the fact
that effective machine learning algorithms for tabular data—such as GBMs—have no
natural mechanism to select relevant items not yet seen by a user. Therefore, there
is a need to deal with this bias and the sparsity arising from the fact that users are
unaware of the existence of a large fraction of the available items. This is a task for
which recommender methods excel. As mentioned in the related work section, we
use both the neural GRU4Rec (Hidasi et al. 2016a) method and the nearest-neighbor
method S-SKNN from Ludewig and Jannach ( 2018) in our experiments to determine
potentially relevant items.
123

704 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
The work of Hidasi et al. ( 2016a) introduced recurrent neural networks, in particu-
lar gated recurrent units (GRUs) to the next view prediction problem for session-based
recommendation. The motivation is the fact that RNNs are tailored to model sequences
and session-based recommenders deal with such sequences of view data. The differ-
ence of GRU4Rec to usual GRUs is mostly given by the different objective, which is
a pairwise ranking based loss function. Moreover, the speciﬁc form of the batchwise
training input data differs, in particular session parallel mini-batches are used.
The Sequential Session-based kNN (S-SKNN) method (also known as SeqContex-
tKNN) from Ludewig and Jannach ( 2018) is inspired by the successful traditional
nearest neighbor methods, adapted to a session-based context. In particular, instead
of ﬁnding similar users or similar items as in user–user or item–item Collaborative
Filtering approach, similar sessions are determined so that items from similar sessions
can be used as recommendations. Technically, it is a sequence-aware method that
puts more weight on recent observations, and is based on cosine similarity as well as
in-memory index data structures for faster computation.
The intuition for combining both S-SKNN and GRU4Rec as preliminary item selec-
tors is that they rely on different principles and thus learn different patterns in the data.
This was partially conﬁrmed in our experiments, although theS-SKNN method overall
worked notably better for our datasets.
4.2 Second phase GBM algorithm
The idea of our proposed second phase approach is to leverage the predictions from
one or several state-of-the art ﬁrst phase session-based or session-aware recommender
methods in a much richer context. Speciﬁcally, we propose a generic and extensive
feature engineering approach (with speciﬁc examples provided in the next Sect. 4.3)
that enriches the predictions by the individual ﬁrst phase methods. Given these predic-
tions or predicted ranks and this set of additional features, we propose to use a machine
learning method that is, for example, able to learn in which situations what kind of
ﬁrst phase recommender algorithm works better, based on all additional features. The
efﬁcacy of this approach is likely due to the fact that the ﬁrst phase recommenders
learn different patterns in the data, which can be synergistic, and the diverse set of
additional features allows the second phase model to learn additional patterns, thus
improving recommendation accuracy.
In particular, we use GBMs as second phase models. GBMs are state-of-the-art
ensemble tree methods that can achieve a high prediction accuracy for tabular data
with many features. They rely on the principle of gradient boosting. It is an iterative
approach in which in every training step a new decision tree is added to the model
by ﬁtting a tree to the negative gradient of the loss based on the model built so far,
thus minimizing the generalized residuals, which implies that there is a focus on
the cases with the highest errors of the previous steps (Hastie et al. 2009). They
work mostly by minimizing the bias from a bias–variance trade–off perspective, but
common implementations also use ideas for reducing variance by subsampling training
data points and features, similar to the bagging in Random Forests. Altogether, GBMs
offer a high generalization ability and effective measures against overﬁtting. Since
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 705
they can learn a large weighted set of rules (based on the individual decision trees
added by boosting) they seem to be tailored to our problem, since as we have seen
in the examples in Sect. 3, user decisions can intuitively be described as such a set
of rules. We used the LightGBM library (Ke et al. 2017) in our experiments, which
offers a very fast as well as accurate and ﬂexible implementation of GBMs.
4.3 Feature engineering for the second phase GBM method
As outlined in Sect.3, the result of the recommender selection algorithms from Sect.4.1
form the basis for our HySAR method making use of GBMs as described in Sect. 4.2.
Having for every session and time stamp in consideration a set of potentially rel-
evant future items, we obtain data in the form of Table 2.N o wt h et a s ki st oe n r i c h
all these data points with features that are likely relevant for predicting which items
the user will buy or put in his or her shopping cart. As demonstrated by the examples
and Algorithm 1 in Sect. 3, this step involves several advanced data preprocessing
techniques, like aggregations on different entities with customized aggregation func-
tions as well as time-based rolling, non-equi joins. The latter terminology means not
to merge on equality conditions, but for example to take the last existent time stamp
in one table before the reference time stamp in another table, similar to the example
provided in Algorithm 1.
Note that the model will predict the add-to-cart or purchase probability for alll items
from the ﬁrst phase recommenders. After sorting decreasingly by this probability, we
obtain a ranked list of items that can be recommended to the user in the given session.
These can be considered as the most probable candidates for being purchased after a
recommendation.
In the following, we provide a list of the feature groups that we engineered this way
along with motivations for their choice. The detailed list of all features can be found
in Appendix A.
User–item–session speciﬁc features
7 are based on derived user–item information,
restricted to a given session. This is done because a current session might differ sub-
stantially from previous sessions of the same user. E.g., on one occasion the user was
looking for a new washing machine, while in another session the user intends to pur-
chase consumables. Such session-speciﬁc features are often highly valuable additions
to pure session-based approaches. The reason is that session-based approaches typi-
cally look at the sequence of items in a given session, but neglect further information
like the current user behavior related to time, interaction types and prices. For exam-
ple, in this group we included features capturing how high in rank each ﬁrst phase
recommendation method predicts a given item to be relevant in comparison to the
other items. Together with the other features, our method can learn in which situations
which ﬁrst phase recommender performs better. We also included prior observation
(i.e., viewing) times, which could be more predictive than the so called dwell time,
since times are summed up in case a user switches between items. Another example
7 Note that the items in this case do not refer to past or currently browsed items, but they correspond to all
potentially relevant future items selected by the ﬁrst phase recommenders, to be predicted for the user in
the current session.
123

706 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
are absolute and relative price differences between the target item and the last item the
user interacted with. Such information can be combined by the model learning with
features that assess whether a customer is price sensitive according to his or her past
buying behavior, as described below.
User–item speciﬁc features aim to capture the preference of a given user for every
item for which a prediction is made, by taking into account the whole history of the
user. These features mostly capture the user behavior related to the items to be scored
by looking at the recency and frequency of his or her interaction as well as the type of
interaction for every item in question. This is achieved by not only looking at the users’
current session, as session-based approaches do, but also information about the users’
past. Examples include the calculation of the number of interactions and the number
of sessions since the last interaction. In addition to time-based features, the number
of sessions since the last interaction provides further information, as very active users
might have viewed an item rather recently but are less likely to be interested in it if
they had many sessions after the last view. We also measured the prior observation
time of an item by a user across all sessions. This can be particularly relevant for
higher priced products for which the user spends a longer time reading the details
across several sessions before making a decision. Also, price changes across sessions
are taken into account. For example, if the price gets cheaper compared to the last time
a user checked but not yet bought an item, a purchase is more likely. These features
can be synergistic. E.g., a user might have spent a lot of time checking the item, but
was hesitating only because of the price.
User–category speciﬁc features were created based on the motivation to deal with
the fact that observations on the item level can be scarce, due to the long-tail problem of
rarely sold or viewed items. This is why it is reasonable to incorporate some analogous
features on the level of product categories, for which more observations exist. We
furthermore used some price sensitivity features deﬁned as differences between mean
prices of items in a category and mean prices of items a user selected from this category.
Moreover, we distinguish between views and purchases, since a user might for example
end up buying products cheaper than the ones he or she viewed.
Session speciﬁc features were added with the reasoning that some attributes only
relate to the given session (and implicitly the corresponding user, but neglecting his
or her past and the speciﬁc items in the session) are also relevant predictors, like the
duration of a session and how many items where already viewed or purchased. This
information helps to decide whether future purchases or views in the current session
are likely. Feature examples include the number of observed actions in a session
and its duration, allowing for a distinction how much time a user spends to check
items compared to clicking through new items. Also, cumulative numbers of different
actions are calculated, since if—for example—a user put 5 out of 10 items he/she
viewed last into the cart, the user is probably more likely to do so with other items
as well. Moreover, the weekday and time of the day of a session reﬂect the fact that
typically more purchases are observed on certain weekdays and hours of a day. Such
features allow us capture such a periodicity.
User speciﬁc features were included since it is also plausible that the general user
behavior over time is predictive for the users’ next actions. For example, if he or she is
a very active user with many sessions and a high number of purchases in the last 100
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 707
interactions, it is more likely he or she will make a purchase. On the other hand, this is
less likely if the user only viewed items without buying anything before. Other exam-
ples include the cumulative number of unique items and categories, which measure the
diversity of interests of a given user. Cumulative counts for different event types were
also calculated by weekday, since this information can help the purchase probability
prediction (e.g., an item which would usually have a high purchase probability even-
tually has a lower one on a day where a user typically does not buy anything). Hour
of day statistics account for the fact that users can have different times for browsing
and buying. E.g., viewing items during the day, but making the purchase later in the
evening. The same applies to the day of the week statistics for every user. Note that
like for the other groups of features, there could be more interaction types than view,
add-to-cart and purchase events. But for our datasets, no additional types of events
were available.
Product category speciﬁc featuresaim to determine the overall relevance and pop-
ularity of a given category, across all users. This includes price and sales statistics
to judge the overall contribution of a category to the business ﬁgures of a company.
Some price-based features are also used to relate them to the price of particular items,
as described in the item speciﬁc feature group. Note that the target categories are
likewise given by the items for which predictions are made, not the currently browsed
categories.
Item speciﬁc features were additionally incorporated in our model. Because aside
from other features related to item attribute metadata that were already part of the
other feature groups we discussed so far, it is also meaningful to include features that
only depend on items. Examples include their time-based statistics, such as purchases
by all users for different time window lengths. These features can be a more reliable
substitute to the cumulative count-based features as they capture item popularity for
varying recent time frames, which can be strong predictors for future interactions.
Other examples include the time since ﬁrst and last item appearances, since they can
furthermore roughly capture when an item became available or when it was removed
from the listing or became less lucrative. The number of unique users who interacted
with items model the fact that some items are often revisited by the same users, but are
not as relevant for others. Price differences are also part of this group and for example
capture whether an item is a higher priced brand product compared to the other items
from the same category, which can be predictive in conjunction with the respective
attributes inferred from user behavior.
Sparse categorical featuresare used to identify the same objects or groups through-
out the whole dataset. This can help the generalization ability, as the model can
implicitly learn biases (like a bias for very active users or very popular items, although
such characteristics can be partially captured by other features). However, some of
those categorical features in contrast led to overﬁtting, as did some other features,
which is why they were removed in the ﬁnal model. A possible explanation for this
is the relatively high number of different IDs for some features. An alternative to this
approach is mentioned in Sect. 8 on future works.
We iterate that the aforementioned feature groups are examples that we used in our
experiments. However, the data that those features are based on are often present in e-
commerce applications. Therefore, the same features that we provide in our templates
123

708 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
can be used in other e-commerce applications, which is a broad domain. Moreover,
some of the features are also relevant in other application scenarios. E.g., on a music
streaming platform the items will be songs, categories will be the genre and instead
of a purchase, we can consider a strong indication of preference if a user listened a
song to the end or multiple times, while viewing events are just shorter samples. This
way, many of the features can in principle be reused in such a context. Moreover, as
we described in Sect. 3.2, in our generic approach new domain speciﬁc features can
be easily integrated.
5 Experimental evaluation
In this section, we present the setup and the results of our experimental evaluation.
5.1 Experimental setup
In the following, we describe the datasets that were used in the experiments, the
preprocessing we applied, and the metrics that we use to assess the effectiveness of
our approach.
5.1.1 Datasets, preprocessing and memory considerations
We used two real-world datasets for our experimental evaluation, both based on
e-commerce data. The ﬁrst one is the Retailrocket dataset, consisting of website
interaction logs distinguishing between item view, add-to-cart and purchase events.
The second dataset is called Diginetica and consists of item views and purchases of
users and search queries, which are however anonymized. Both datasets provide addi-
tional dynamic item metadata with varying attribute values over time. TheRetailrocket
dataset consists of 2,756,101 logged interactions (events), while Diginetica contains
1,235,380 interactions. However, only 372,991 interactions of the Diginetica dataset
have an associated user ID, which is required to make use of all possible features
provided by our method. Unlike the Retailrocket dataset, the Diginetica dataset also
does not contain add-to-cart but only purchase events. The Retailrocket dataset does
not provide session IDs, but only user IDs. Therefore, new sessions were identiﬁed by
idle times of more than 30 min, as often done in the literature.
We further applied some essential ﬁltering on both datasets as it is common
for experiments with recommender systems, including session-based recommenders.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁlter out items for which we observed less than 5 interactions, to
focus on items that appear more frequently in different sessions, therefore strength-
ening learning by ﬁnding similar sessions. And naturally, we can only make use of
sessions with at least two items. After preprocessing, we obtain the statistics shown
in Table 3.
As outlined before in Sect. 3, our approach results in a high number of data points
and can therefore have a high working memory demand, because every candidate item
to be scored results in an additional data row (i.e., with l candidate items, there are l ·
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 709
Table 3 Statistics of the datasets
after common preprocessing Statistic/dataset Retailrocket Diginetica
Number of unique sessions 352,702 56,836
Number of unique items 79,777 18,550
Number of unique users 290,110 54,029
n fe a t values for every observation in the original data).8 Therefore, for theRetailrocket
dataset, we used more recent data for training our proposed method HySAR for lower
working memory requirements and faster computations. Speciﬁcally, we chose about
37% of the data, consisting of the more recent time buckets. Using older historical
data in addition will likely further increase performance. For the same reason, we
sampled one time stamp per session, but all sessions of each dataset are considered.
For the Diginetica dataset, we tested using more than one time stamp per session,
which resulted in slightly better results for our approach. But the difference is modest,
suggesting that the amount of training data is big enough already, and the various
prediction situations in a session (e.g., rather in the beginning or the end of a session)
are covered by the high number of sessions.
5.1.2 Baselines, evaluation setup and hyperparameters
As discussed earlier, we chose the S-SKNN and GRU4Rec methods both as ﬁrst phase
recommenders and as baselines due to their high performance for e-commerce data
as shown in Ludewig and Jannach ( 2018). As in the original papers, predictions are
generated in a “rolling” manner for the next item. I.e., only one step ahead is forecasted
instead of the entire remaining session. This approach is also used to generate data for
our HySAR method (every predicted candidate item yields a row, cf. Sect. 3.1).
We both report the accuracy with respect to an evaluation scheme in which the
ground truth are the immediate next items and in which all following items are consid-
ered as the ground truth. We discuss this in Sect. 5.3. Note that even in case of the next
item evaluation, there can be cases of several next items with the same time stamps in
the data (e.g., simultaneous purchases). In this case, both are included in the ground
truth.
We used a temporal splitting based on the generated time buckets for the evaluation,
with the test set being after the validation set and the validation set after the training
set (with the exception of overlapping sessions). This way, we also have sessions of
new users in the validation and test sets, as this can be also the case in production.
As described before, we focus primarily on the task of predicting item add-to-cart
and purchase events, as these are the most important events in this application domain.
We however also consider the “next-view” prediction problem that is commonly con-
8 Note that a possible way to lower the working memory demand is to process the data batch-wise and
store it on disk. E.g., when creating features depending on users and their past behavior, batches of users
can be processed and stored. The same applies to different entities. The LightGBM package (Ke et al.
2017), which we used, also supports training with most data being on disk. Despite the memory demand,
the running time for the feature generation and training of our HySAR method itself is typically lower than
generating the predictions from the ﬁrst phase baseline methods for all time buckets.
123

710 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
sidered in the literature. In the results of the evaluation shown in the next section, cases
are excluded in which the future item (for which an add-to-cart or purchase action is
predicted) coincides with the currently viewed item. This is appropriate, because in
practice we would not want to recommend a currently viewed item to a user for pur-
chase. This simple restriction however makes a signiﬁcant difference in the absolute
performance values. This is due to the fact that in many cases users click on an item
and directly make a purchase afterwards.
In order to have a fair comparison, for the evaluation only those items were consid-
ered which were included in the ﬁrst phase selection (based onS-SKNN and GRU4Rec,
as described in Sect.4.1). We observed that without that restriction, substantially higher
accuracy values can be achieved. This suggests that using alternative ﬁrst phase item
selection strategies should be explored in future research.
In terms of the hyperparameters of our approach, we used k = 20 time buckets and
we generated l = 200 candidate items (per selected time stamp of each session) based
on the ﬁrst phase recommenders S-SKNN and GRU4Rec, according to the description
in Sect. 4.1. Even better results for our method may be possible by systematically
tuning these hyperparameters. E.g., higher values for k and l could lead to better
results, but they also increase the memory demand as they result in an increase of the
data.
We initially tuned the remaining hyperparameters of our method and baselines by
random search. However, we found a conﬁguration for the baselines as well as our
proposed method and its GBM parameters that works well for both datasets and pre-
diction tasks. While small improvements can be achieved by additional parameter
tunings, we used this conﬁguration. We do this because the consistency in the perfor-
mance suggest a higher robustness for new datasets and various tasks, and a reduction
of time needed for hyperparameter search. Connected to this, it is important to note
that unlike in common cases, the performance of our proposed method HySAR and
the baselines are not independent. Our baselines are not only baselines in the common
sense, but at the same time serve as ﬁrst phase item selection and scoring algorithms
and their results are incorporated in our method by the second phase GBM algorithm
(see Sect. 4). Since our method is a stacking approach, any performance increases by
better parameters of the baselines usually also increase the performance of our pro-
posed method. This is because the better quality of the predictions and the selected
items is a beneﬁt to the stacking GBM model, which is build on top of them.
5.1.3 Running time considerations
In the following, we want to address aspects regarding the running time complexity of
our proposed method. To summarize the most important points regarding the compu-
tational demand, the generation of the ﬁrst phase session-based recommenders takes
the highest proportion of the running time. Compared to using only one ﬁrst phase
recommender directly without our approach, there is a considerable overhead, but this
process has to be done only one timewith all the available historical data. As described
in Sect. 3.2, this is done by iteratively training models on all previous time buckets
and making predictions for the next time buckets. The training time depends on the
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 711
chosen number of time buckets k and lowering k will therefore reduce the running
time and may still give good accuracy. The same applies to other settings.
By noting that the successive training times can be expressed as a geometric series,
we can estimate the one time running time demand to be approximately by a factor
(k − 1)/2 higher than training a ﬁrst phase recommender on the whole data, assuming
a linear increase with the amount of data. There is also an additional need to generate
predictions from the trained ﬁrst phase recommender on every time bucket, which
can be longer, but these predictions might be already available in practice, since they
correspond to the calculations needed to deliver recommendations to customers (i.e.,
the successive training and prediction for next time buckets can arise naturally in
practice and in this case there is no initial computational overhead).
After these potentially needed one time additional computations, the required run-
ning time can be substantially decreased, since only incremental updates are needed
to train the newest models (with all data at once or weight updates just with new data)
and make predictions for the last time folds for the use in production. The same applies
to the feature generation, the running time of which can also be decreased respectively
by only calculating the features for the newest data and using cached data for the
features based on historical records.
We have assessed more thoroughly the one time running time of our method for
the whole historical data. We considered the bigger Retailrocket dataset and the next
view prediction case commonly used in the literature. We further point out that we did
not employ any performance enhancements. The GRU4Rec method was running on a
machine with 6 CPU cores, while substantial performance increases could be achieved
by using a GPU, which partially also would be the case for our GBM based method.
The same applies to using a possible multiprocessing for the S-SKNN method, which
was running on a single core in our experiments, as well as many parts of the feature
engineering, since performance optimization was not in our scope for this paper.
The total time needed to train and generate the predictions of the GRU4Rec method
for all historical time buckets was about 24 h 23 min in our experiments. The corre-
sponding time for the S-SKNN method was shorter with around 11 h 14 min. The time
needed for the feature engineering from all the historical data and generating optional
cache ﬁles for future reuse was approximately 2 h 18 min, and training the second level
GBM model of our HySAR method itself including the postprocessing took about 1 h
42 min.
Further note that aside the remedies to improve running times discussed so far,
upscaling is more easily possible and of lower cost, since the calculation for the whole
historical data has to be performed only once if required at all. For example, it would
be possible by using cloud computing with instances having more resources. Also
note that for the use in production, the period of model retraining can be adapted and
for a short time frame of new data, tangible differences in performance are unlikely.
Therefore, already trained models can be used. Choosing computationally better per-
forming ﬁrst phase methods is also an effective remedy in this regard, since this directly
impacts the running time of our proposed method. Increasing the learning rate would
offer faster training with only small accuracy decreases for training the HySAR GBM
model in particular. Moreover, if a substantial amount of more recent data is available
123

712 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
for training, the less important it will likely be for accuracy to use older historical data,
so restricting to fewer recent time buckets would also be an effective measure.
5.1.4 Evaluation metrics
We report the results with respect to several well-known metrics, which are tailored to
measure ranking accuracy (i.e., the higher, the better), in particular for the top items.
For this purpose, we use the popularMean Average Precision (MAP)metric. Precision
measures how many items from the list of the items with the highest predicted values
were actually relevant and the precision values at different positions are averaged in the
MAP metric. We report this metric at the threshold of 10, since the topmost items are
the most relevant ones. In addition to Precision, Recall measures how many of all the
truly relevant (e.g., bought) items are included in the prediction list. Speciﬁcally, we
include Recall@1, which coincides with theHitRate in case of only one true item. This
metric was used extensively in the previous literature on session-based recommender
systems. We also report the common Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) metric, which
is given by the mean of 1 /rank
i over all cases i, where rank i is the rank of the
ﬁrst correctly predicted item in list i (e.g., the position of the ﬁrst item in the sorted
prediction list that was actually bought). The metric puts special emphasis on the fact
that the ﬁrst relevant item should be placed as high as possible in the recommendation
list. In addition, we report the often used ranking measure normalized Discounted
Cumulative Gain (nDCG) . In the deﬁnition of the nDCG that we used, the list of
the actual items afterwards in a session determine the ideal score, each with the same
relevance. The list of the predicted items (determined by the ﬁrst phase recommenders
and the score by the respective algorithm) is matched with this list of true items, and
according to the deﬁnition of the DCG each position is logarithmically downweighted
depending how far the true items appear in the prediction list.
5.2 Experimental results for the next item prediction task
We present our results both with respect to the central purchase or add-to-cart rec-
ommendation prediction problems, as well as the case of the next view prediction
problem that is more common in the literature, as outlined in Sect. 3. The ground truth
is given by the immediate next items. For the purchase or add-to-cart case, the results
are reported in Table 4 for the Retailrocket dataset and in Table 5 for the Diginetica
dataset, each with respect to the average values of all metrics. For the case of views, the
respective results can be found in Table6 for the Retailrocket dataset and in Table7 for
the Diginetica dataset. In addition to the performance results of our HySAR method,
the performance of the S-SKNN and GRU4Rec methods themselves (see Sect. 4.1)a r e
reported as baselines.
As we can see, our method consistently performs better than the baselines in a
signiﬁcant way. This can mostly be attributed to our new approach which involves the
extensive engineering of additional predictive features used in conjunction with the
ﬁrst phase recommender predictions, leading to superior forecasting accuracy in our
GBM models. We can furthermore observe that theS-SKNN method achieves a notably
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 713
Table 4 Results with the mean
metric values for the
purchase/add-to-cart prediction
for the Retailrocket dataset, with
the next items as the ground truth
Metric/results HySAR S-SKNN GRU4Rec
Recall@1 0.1411 0.1030 0.0764
MAP@10 0.2140 0.1726 0.1199
MRR 0.2239 0.1804 0.1293
nDCG 0.2899 0.2427 0.2000
Table 5 Results with the mean
metric values for the
purchase/add-to-cart prediction
for the Diginetica dataset, with
the next items as the ground truth
Metric/Results HySAR S-SKNN GRU4Rec
Recall@1 0.1640 0.0977 0.0536
MAP@10 0.2057 0.1452 0.0809
MRR 0.2287 0.1653 0.0960
nDCG 0.2571 0.2006 0.1393
Table 6 Results with the mean
metric values for the view
prediction for the Retailrocket
dataset, with the next items as
the ground truth
Metric/results HySAR S-SKNN GRU4Rec
Recall@1 0.2024 0.1550 0.1219
MAP@10 0.2916 0.2335 0.1965
MRR 0.2995 0.2400 0.2059
nDCG 0.3781 0.3095 0.2913
Table 7 Results with the mean
metric values for the view
prediction for the Diginetica
dataset, with the next items as
the ground truth
Metric/results HySAR S-SKNN GRU4Rec
Recall@1 0.1069 0.0894 0.0678
MAP@10 0.1935 0.1654 0.1301
MRR 0.2071 0.1765 0.1449
nDCG 0.3133 0.2663 0.2521
better result as a recommender than the GRU4Rec method. This might be surprising
at ﬁrst, but is consistent with previous ﬁndings in the literature for these datasets, that
also showed lower performance results of GRU4Rec compared to S-SKNN for some
datasets (cf. Ludewig and Jannach2018 and Ludewig et al.2021). This might be due to
the fact that the assumption to estimate relevant items in a session by items of similar
other sessions works well, also with respect to a limited amount of data, since for the
smaller dataset the relative difference between the two baselines is higher. For other
datasets (non-e-commerce or publicly not available ones) different results were found,
with GRU4Rec sometimes performing better.
Despite the fact that S-SKNN works better, additionally including the predictions
from the GRU4Rec algorithm does help the performance of our ensembling HySAR
method. This could be explained by the fact that the types of recommendations differ
between GRU4Rec and S-SKNN, as they take different approaches in learning from
data. Note that for the Retailrocket dataset, higher absolute values can be achieved in
123

714 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
the case of a next view prediction than a next purchase/add-to-cart prediction, while
these results are mixed for the Diginetica dataset. This can probably be attributed
to the fact that some add-to-carts and purchases are performed later in a session, as
conﬁrmed by our experiments in Sect. 5.3. The absolute differences between both
datasets are likely due to the different distributions and purchase patterns, as well as
their respective sizes.
We further observe that the GRU4Rec method performs notably worse relatively to
the other methods for the purchase/add-to-cart case compared to the case of views. This
is especially the case for the most important top positions, while for higher thresholds
the relative difference seems to decrease, suggesting that GRU4Rec does ﬁnd relevant
items also for the purchase prediction, but notably slower in this case.
Especially for the Diginetica dataset, the purchase prediction results in a higher
relative performance gain of our method over the best baseline compared to the
view prediction problem, while the gains are similar for the Retailrocket dataset. The
comparatively better results of the GRU4Rec method in case of the view prediction
compared to the purchase prediction likely improved the performance of our method
for the view prediction in comparison to the purchase prediction. Another ﬁrst phase
method that works better for the purchase prediction would likely further increase the
performance of our proposed method. Thus an overall higher gain should be possible
for the purchase prediction, which is reasonable, since more features are available
in this case (e.g., features distinguishing between interaction types, as described in
Sect. 4.3).
It may also be possible to improve the case of the view prediction with more features
based on purchase and add-to-cart events, too (e.g., as a simple example, viewing can
become less likely after buying). However, the other approaches in the literature did
not take into account information about purchases, so we also focused on views only
to have a better comparison.
We furthermore note that for some experiments with theGRU4Rec method (in both
the next and all remaining prediction case in the next section), earlier experiments
led to somewhat better results than the ﬁnal runs which were used for generating the
ﬁrst phase recommendations for our proposed method. We provided those values for
the GRU4Rec method, which are about 10% (and up to 20%) higher, and a bit better
results still can be possible for different runs. However, because of the gaps to the next
best method, these differences do not change the overall result.
Additionally, we note that we conducted experiments in which we removed all
features from our model that were based on the user and his or her behavior and
we address these results in more detail in Sect. 7. We want to add that we also
conducted preliminary experiments with additional features that are similar to the
ones already mentioned. For example, it is possible to consider fractions of the
existing running count based features by user comparing different event types (e.g.,
run_count_add_to_cart/run_count_view). Likewise, the same time win-
dow based features for the items can also be calculated on a user–item and user level
by simply changing the aggregation IDs. And the time since the ﬁrst interaction can
also be used by user instead of only by the user–item interaction. The results indicate
some improvements for the Retailrocket dataset, and modest gains for the Diginetica
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 715
dataset. We have not tested these variants for all cases however and therefore they are
not included in the presented results.
5.3 Experimental results for an evaluation with all remaining items as the ground
truth
So far, we considered the case in which the ground truth is based on the immediate
next items, as it was often done in the literature. However, considering all remaining
items in the given session as the ground truth set can be more reasonable, as argued in
Ludewig and Jannach (2018). One reason is that a user might perform an action with a
delay, after browsing other items. It also aids in addressing data sparsity issues. On the
other hand however, preferences might change during a session and in such cases later
items might not be as relevant as the items prior in a session, which is not taken into
account if all remaining items are considered. We have also performed an evaluation
with this extended set of ground truth items. However, although the evaluation was
based on all remaining items, the model training was so far based on the next items
only, as in the case of the next view or purchase prediction. For our proposed method,
it is however easily possible to add later items from the remainder of any session to the
training set. This is likely to improve the results, since training tasks and evaluation
would be better aligned.
Moreover, there is a caveat in the case of the purchase/add-to-cart prediction. Since
in our evaluation approach we so far randomly sampled a time stamp for any session,
often a time stamp relatively early in a session will be used. These early actions might
not be as representative for later purchase decisions, as argued above. Therefore, we
used the time stamp of the last view before the ﬁrst add-to-cart or purchase instead of
a randomly sampled time in this case. Although this precise time is not known a priori
in production, we argue that this assessment is important in practice, because many
websites provide recommendations for supplementary items during the checkout right
before the purchase. Moreover, a user might ﬁnally evaluate any substitute articles
before making the purchase.
The results for the evaluation with all remaining items as the ground truth are shown
in Tables 8 for the Retailrocket and in Table 9 for the Diginetica dataset for the case
of add-to-cart/purchase prediction. For the view prediction, the results can be found
in Table 10 and in Table 11, respectively.
We can observe from the results that our method still performs best and the overall
ranking stays the same, but the relative performance gain of our method over the
baselines is a bit lower compared to the next purchase or view prediction problem
Table 8 Results with the mean
metric values for the
purchase/add-to-cart prediction
for the Retailrocket dataset, with
all remaining items as the
ground truth
Metric/results HySAR S-SKNN GRU4Rec
Recall@1 0.1416 0.1159 0.0899
MAP@10 0.2197 0.1830 0.1419
MRR 0.2628 0.2209 0.1746
nDCG 0.2973 0.2526 0.2198
123

716 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
Table 9 Results with the mean
metric values for the
purchase/add-to-cart prediction
for the Diginetica dataset, with
all remaining items as the
ground truth
Metric/results HySAR S-SKNN GRU4Rec
Recall@1 0.2053 0.1551 0.0486
MAP@10 0.2687 0.2154 0.0951
MRR 0.3175 0.2546 0.1168
nDCG 0.3411 0.2906 0.1776
Table 10 Results with the mean
metric values for the view
prediction for the Retailrocket
dataset, with all remaining items
as the ground truth
Metric/results HySAR S-SKNN GRU4Rec
Recall@1 0.1901 0.1475 0.1164
MAP@10 0.2865 0.2298 0.1935
MRR 0.3287 0.2663 0.2280
nDCG 0.3837 0.3138 0.2974
Table 11 Results with the mean
metric values for the view
prediction for the Diginetica
dataset, with all remaining items
as the ground truth
Metric/results HySAR S-SKNN GRU4Rec
Recall@1 0.0974 0.0837 0.0610
MAP@10 0.1880 0.1613 0.1248
MRR 0.2601 0.2258 0.1865
nDCG 0.3305 0.2805 0.2674
from the previous section. We assume this to be the case due to some heterogeneity
in the sessions with preference shifts in between, as well as the fact that our method
was only trained with the next items rather than all remaining items in the session, as
we described above.
Moreover, it is noteworthy that with exception of some cases for the Recall@1
metric, the absolute values are higher for all methods compared to the next item
prediction case, which can probably be attributed to a bigger set of ground truth items.
The fact that this is not always the case for the Recall@1 metric could be explained
by the same reason, since many relevant items in this case are not considered at a
threshold of 1.
Note that we also performed statistical signiﬁcance tests for all cases (both datasets,
prediction targets and next item as well as all remaining item predictions). In accor-
dance with previous works from the literature, we used a Wilcoxon signed rank test
at a level of α = 0.05 to measure the signiﬁcance in difference between our proposed
method HySAR and the best performing baseline. We found that all performance dif-
ferences are signiﬁcant, with many p-values being considerably lower than 0.05. The
comparatively higher p-values were observed for the add-to-cart/purchase prediction
for the next item case and the Recall@1 metric, considering only one item. This is
reasonable, since in these cases the ground truth sets are smaller.
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 717
6 Feature impact analysis
In this section, we investigate what features contribute to what extent to our overall
GBM based recommendation prediction model. As mentioned in the beginning, we
make use of the SHAP method (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Scott et al. 2020) with
a corresponding shap library which is based on a game theoretic attribution concept
using Shapley values. It allows for a fair assessment of the contributions of every feature
to the overall model. Recently, many papers have been published on explainable AI,
some of which address recommender systems. However, to our knowledge, none has
performed an analysis similar to ours. The papers we found in the literature either used
a different methodology, different types of recommendation (i.e., not session-aware)
or a different application. See, e.g., Afchar et al. ( 2022) for explainability in music
recommendation, or a movie recommendation context in Roberts et al. ( 2022). Some
other papers also made use of the SHAP method, but with a different intention and not
for e-commerce data. For example, it was used after a clustering of users for movie
preference data, to determine which clusters users belong to (Misztal-Radecka and
Indurkhya 2021). In Geng et al. ( 2022), a session-based recommendation setting is
considered, but with the purpose of causality modeling. Many papers in this area also
focus on explanation to the users, while our intention is to provide explanations to the
companies and developers of recommender systems, in order to improve the latter and
get more intuition into the user behavior.
We focus on our main purchase/add-to-cart prediction problem. The results are
shown in Fig. 1, which includes the top 20 features of highest importance, ordered
decreasingly by the importance value. We notice that many feature rely on the category
rather than the item, which could be explained by data sparsity, with more observations
being available on the category level. We want to emphasize that the features listed
in this chart were calculated with respect to the target item and its category to be
predicted, not the currently browsed item or category.
Every row in this chart represents a feature and the points in the corresponding row
are data examples which are colored according to the value of the respective feature,
based on the overall distribution. Red colors correspond to high values, while blue
colors represent low ones. Gray corresponds to unknown values. Furthermore, the
points are ordered on the horizontal axis based on their impact on the model output
(SHAP). That means, the further a point is to the right, the higher is the increase
in the output purchase probability because of the corresponding feature value. The
opposite holds for points on the left, for which the respective feature value lowers the
probability.
The following insights can be derived from Fig. 1:
– The top ranked feature ( future_item_rank_base_1) in fact corresponds to
the predicted rank by the ﬁrst phase recommender S-SKNN in this case. Since low
rank values correspond to a high score of an item by S-SKNN, the blue points are
the ones the S-SKNN method estimates to be the most relevant items. And in these
cases, the purchase probability generated by our HySAR method is increased as a
result.
123

718 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
Fig. 1 Feature importance based on Shapley values. We show the top 20 most important features, sorted in
descending order. Every point is a data example. The colors reﬂect whether the feature values are high (red)
or low (blue). Gray colors correspond to NULL values of the corresponding feature. The further a point is
to the right, the higher is the increase in purchase probability due to this feature value. On the other hand,
for points on the left the probability gets lowered because of the respective feature value
– The predicted rankings by the GRU4Rec method have less impact (ranked number
8), but this feature is still among the top, showing that both ﬁrst phase baseline
recommenders can produce session-based recommendations useful for our second
phase personalized session-based HySAR method.
– The feature with the second highest impact is price sensitivity related
(user_category_relative_price_sensitivity_views), and is
deﬁned as the difference between the mean price of items from the target cat-
egory viewed by all users and the mean price of items from this category the given
user viewed. I.e., a collaborative effect is being taken into account by making use
of the browsing patterns of all other users, leveraging all historical data. Interest-
ingly, by analyzing the color distribution on the left and right hand side, we see
that more price sensitive customers seem to have a higher willingness to buy when
they ﬁnd a good offer. This suggests a signiﬁcant role of bargain hunters.
– The last ﬁnding matches with the pattern of another feature, namely the mean
price of items of the respective category that the user has viewed: the lower the
price, the higher the chances of purchase. Because the blue points representing low
mean price values are concentrated on the right. However, there are some users
who show an opposite pattern (red dots on the right). Note that our model can
learn interactions between this feature, the previous price sensitivity feature and
the item price itself in order to decide what items match to the price expectations
of users.
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 719
– The feature with the third highest importance is the running (cumulative) count of
interactions in the respective category of the future item by the given user. This
feature does not only take into account views but also purchase events and is also
calculated across all past sessions. This demonstrates that information prior to the
current session can be valuable. Note that the gray dots correspond to new category
interactions by a user, ones he or she did not interact with before.
– The next feature is the attribute describing the time since a user ﬁrst viewed any
item in the target category across past sessions, also capturing long-term interest.
Indeed, as we can see on the right-hand side, higher times increase the purchase
probability as they often correspond to loyal customers.
– On rank 5 we have the feature representing the time since the start of a session. It
shows the intuitive fact that the longer a current session is, the more likely a user
is going to buy some items.
– The next feature user_item_session_interaction_diff describes
how many sessions ago a user last interacted with the target item for which a
scoring is made, either by viewing or buying. This feature can be seen as capturing
the recency with respect to the user—item interaction.
– The time since the last view of an item across all users on rank 7 indicates the
current popularity of the item in question. E.g., when there is a new promotion on
an item, it is viewed very frequently and the time is therefore very short.
– It is interesting to see that for user_item_time_since_first_
interaction at rank 10, we have a mixture of both high and low values on the
right-hand side, therefore increasing the purchase probability. This means that in
some cases very recent new item interactions by users lead to a purchase. But on
the other hand, in many cases also longer times increase the probability, depending
on other features.
– The feature run_number_of_observations_by_category_last_3_
months at rank 12 captures the recent popularity of the respective target category.
– There are also several other item based features placed a bit lower, such as the last
purchase of an item across all users and the time a user ﬁrst viewed an item across
all his or her sessions. There are also features capturing the latest interactions by
users, such as the second last on the list, recording the time since a category was
last viewed by a user.
To summarize, the ﬁndings in this analysis are intuitive yet enlightening. An analysis
based on Shapley feature importance values on top of our recommendation approach
offers good interpretability and better business understanding of the customers in an
organization. This does not only help customers in their decision making process, but
also aids in managerial decisions for example in departments involved in customer
relationship management.
7 Ablation study
A feature impact analysis with theSHAP method as outlined in the previous Sect.6 can
give a good intuition about what types of features are important. Also, some works use
123

720 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
Table 12 Ablation study results for the purchase/add-to-cart prediction for the Retailrocket dataset, with
the next items as the ground truth
V ariant/metric Recall@1 MAP@10 MRR nDCG
BasicSessionInformation 0.1096 0.1803 0.1907 0.2640
NoUserItemInteractionInformation 0.1201 0.2039 0.2145 0.2838
NoUserInformation 0.1168 0.2013 0.2118 0.2818
DefaultModel 0.1411 0.2140 0.2239 0.2899
Table 13 Ablation study results for the purchase/add-to-cart prediction for the Diginetica dataset, with the
next items as the ground truth
V ariant/metric Recall@1 MAP@10 MRR nDCG
BasicSessionInformation 0.1097 0.1627 0.1804 0.2230
NoUserItemInteractionInformation 0.1359 0.1788 0.2035 0.2373
NoUserInformation 0.1538 0.1908 0.2123 0.2458
DefaultModel 0.1640 0.2057 0.2287 0.2571
Shapley value based ablation in order to increase performance by removing a subset
of features (e.g., Chen et al. 2022;U k i le ta l .2022). However, while theSHAP method
as discussed in Sect. 6 has several desirable properties such as local accuracy and
consistency as described in the respective references, feature importance contributions
in general do not directly translate to differences in overall accuracy.
Thus, since there is no direct association between Shapley value based feature
importances and global model performance, we also performed an ablation study, in
which we tested a few variants of our proposed model with different sets of features
selected or removed. We chose these sets as intuitive groups of features describing
different types of side information to be considered or not, e.g., relating to whether or
not user based or interaction based information is incorporated.
We consider the next purchase/add-to-cart case and compare the default model from
Sect. 5.2 with different variants in which certain types of features are excluded. The
results are summarized in Tables 12 and 13 for the Diginetica and the Retailrocket
dataset, respectively.
The BasicSessionInformation variant considers the ﬁrst phase recommender pre-
diction alongside some basic session information (in particular the number of views
and purchases in the given session, the time since its start and the observation time of
an item by the user in the current session). As we can see from the results, the per-
formance of this model variant is better than the best baseline, but notably below the
values achievable by the DefaultModel, therefore highlighting the beneﬁt of including
additional features capturing various types of information.
The NoUserItemInteractionInformation variant is a model that does not include
information related to the interaction of a user with a particular item or the corre-
sponding item category, including in the given session. It however includes features
like the number of unique items a user interacted with, which does not depend on a
certain item. The results show that this model variant achieves results between the
DefaultModel and the BasicSessionInformation model, demonstrating that both the
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 721
excluded user–item interaction features as well as the remaining features are important
for the model accuracy.
The NoUserInformation variant corresponds to a pure session-based approach that
neglects prior and side information about users. The variant however still comprises
user based features that only depend on the given session (e.g., the observation time
of an item by the given user in the current session). As we can see, there is also beneﬁt
in incorporating user based information and this variant also lies between the values
of the BasicSessionInformation variant and the DefaultModel, being mostly closer
to the DefaultModel. For one dataset, the values are close to the NoUserItemInter-
actionInformation, while for the other one the removal of user based features seems
to matter less. The fact that this model variant is mostly close in performance to the
default model highlights that short-term session-based information is most important
and information about the user from previous sessions helps, but provides a compara-
bly limited gain. This might also be due to the fact that in the used datasets, there are
many users with just one session.
Overall, we can infer that different types of features contribute to the overall model
performance and that it can be worthwhile to perform such analyses as the relevance of
each feature group may differ depending on the data at hand. The results suggest that
more types of features can improve the model quality if the corresponding information
is available in practice.
8 Conclusions and future works
Existing research in the area of session-based and session-aware recommendation
largely relies on pure collaborative ﬁltering approaches, where recorded user–item
interactions are the main or only basis for learning next-item prediction models. Only
limited work exists so far in terms of leveraging various types of side information
in the recommendation process, which are commonly available in practice. In this
work, we have proposed a method that combines the power of existing session-based
or session-aware models with extensive generic feature engineering techniques in
a GBM-based ensembling approach. Our experimental results clearly indicate that
substantial performance increases in session-based recommendations can be achieved
by combining the predictions of several state-of-the-art session-based recommender
methods with a second phase machine learning based approach that incorporates a
high variety of features.
While our experiments so far are limited to the domain of e-commerce, it is
important to note that the core of our method is generic and not tied to a particu-
lar application domain or certain types of item side information. Arbitrary static and
dynamic attributes from a given application can be incorporated, and many of our
current features are actually domain-independent, e.g., those relating to the number
of previous interactions or time-related ones. Moreover, any other additional session-
based or session-aware recommendation algorithm can be used in the ﬁrst phase of
the computations, further improving them.
There are several directions for future research. As mentioned above, it is important
to perform additional evaluations in other applications domains. Such evaluations may
123

722 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
mainly require an additional feature engineering step for those features that are speciﬁc
to the application.
From a technical perspective, the overall performance of our method depends on
the quality of the item selection task in the ﬁrst phase. 9 Apart from using alternative
session-based or session-aware recommender algorithms, alternative ways of prelimi-
nary item selection can be explored. This may, for example, include advanced sampling
techniques, augmenting with trending items, learning models on different hierarchies
and to separately compute factorization models or embeddings in an iterative way in
order to determine the most similar items to given ones in a session.
Furthermore, the second phase method could be reﬁned. So far, we used GBMs
on top of our feature engineering-based approach. A promising alternative could be a
neural network (NN) approach that not only performs the scoring of selected items,
but also incorporates the ﬁrst phase item selection task in one single method. Exten-
sive feature engineering will mostly likely still be essential for such a method to be
effective. While NN approaches nowadays perform well also for certain types of tab-
ular data, they often seem to be not at the same performance level yet when it comes
to feature learning as they are for example on image recognition or natural language
processing. Likewise, the principle of incorporating several other session-based or
session-aware recommendation methods will probably still be an important factor, as
different approaches learn different patterns in the data and thus provide a synergy.
Author Contributions JB and DJ wrote the main manuscript text. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Funding Open access funding provided by University of Klagenfurt. No funds, grants, or other support
was received. The authors have no relevant ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interests to disclose.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
Appendix A: List of engineered features
In the following, in Table 14 we provide a list of the features which we engineered,
organized by the different groups with their motivations outlined in Sect. 4.3.N o t e
that there can be multiple features by row, as evident in their description.
9 We empirically conﬁrmed the large potential by evaluating an additional idealized scenario in which all
true positives are supplied in the ﬁrst phase, which provides an upper bound for the potential of better ﬁrst
phase recommenders.
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 723
Table 14 List of the generated features mentioned in Sect. 4.3 on feature engineering
User–item–session speciﬁc features
The predicted ranks by both ﬁrst phase recommenders and their combined ranking
The number of views, add-to-carts and purchases by the user for every relevant item in the
current session up to the given time stamp (each as a separate feature)
The prior observation time of the item by the user in the current session
The category of the item the user last interacted with in a session (as a categorical feature)
The category of the item for which a prediction is made (as a categorical feature)
A binary indicator whether or not the category of the last interacted item is the same as the
category of the item for which a prediction is made
An indicator whether the current item is identical to the item being predicted (excluded in the
experiments if true)
Whether the item to be predicted is available at the respective time, i.e., in stock for fast
delivery
The price of the item the user last interacted with
The price of the target item
The price difference between the target item and the last item the user interacted with
The relative price difference between the target item and the last item
User–item speciﬁc features
The time since a user ﬁrst had an interaction with the future target item to be predicted (if
there was any), and distinguished by interaction type
The time since a user last interacted with/viewed/added/bought a given item
The running count of interactions, the number of view, add-to-cart and purchase events of a
user for every relevant item up to the current time for which a prediction is made
How many sessions ago the user last interacted with an item
The number of sessions since the user interacted with an item for the ﬁrst time
The prior observation time of the item by the user in total
The price difference of the item to be predicted between the current session and the last session
User–category speciﬁc features
The time since the ﬁrst interaction of a user with the category of an item to be predicted
The time since the last interaction with this category
The times since the ﬁrst and the last view/add-to-cart and purchase events for any item of the
target category (yielding 6 different features)
The cumulative number of interactions a user had in the past with items from the target
category
The number of sessions since a user last interacted with items from the target category
The mean price of items the user viewed/bought from the category
123

724 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
Table 14 continued
User–category speciﬁc features
The price sensitivity of a user for buying in the given category (deﬁned by difference in means,
e.g., a higher positive value resembles that a user prefers cheaper products in a category)
The price sensitivity of a user for browsing in the given category of the item to be predicted
Session speciﬁc features
The time since the start of the current session
The number of observed actions by the user in the current session
Whether the last observed event was a view, add-to-cart or purchase event
The cumulative count of view, add-to-cart and purchase events of the user over all items in the
given session, for a varying number of last observations
The weekday of the current session (may change if the session lies between two days)
The smoothed current time of the day
User speciﬁc features
The number of sessions the given user already had
The time since the last interaction observed for the given user
The time since the users’ last view, add-to-cart and purchase
The running count of views/add-to-carts/purchases by a user, for different window lengths
(e.g., 10 and 100, yielding 6 features)
The price sensitivity of the user, deﬁned as the difference between the mean price of items all
users selected and the mean price of items the current user selected
Quantiles of the hours of day with user activity
Statistics on the hours of day when the user made purchases (the median and quartiles)
The cumulative count of both view and either add-to-cart or purchase events for a user by
every weekday, yielding 14 features used to construct two features that measure these
numbers for the weekday of the current session
The cumulative number of unique items and unique categories the user interacted with
The running number of observations for the user in the last three months
Product category speciﬁc features (of the target item)
The cumulative number of unique users that interacted with the category of the candidate item
The mean price of items in the respective category
The mean price of items in the category which users selected
The running number of observations in the given category (all interactions in the past three
months with respect to the current time of prediction)
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 725
Table 14 continued
Item speciﬁc features (of the target item)
The time since the ﬁrst appearance of an item (i.e., any interaction type by any user)
The time since the last appearance of an item
The time an item was ﬁrst viewed/added to a basket or bought by any user
How long ago such view, add-to-cart and purchase events happened last
The cumulative number of appearances of an item in the clickstream log data
The count of views, add-to-cart events and purchases of the given item in the past
Moving time window statistics for interactions with the given item in all sessions in recent
times, distinguished between view, add-to-cart and purchase events. Their respective
numbers are calculated within the last hour, day, week and last four weeks with respect to
the current time stamp (i.e., 12 features in total). The speciﬁc window sizes can be adapted
The number of all observations made for an item in the last three months
The number of unique users that have interacted with the item
The price difference between the item price and the mean price of items in the respective
category
The price difference between the item price and the mean price of items that were bought in
the respective category
Sparse categorical features
Sparse categorical features of users, items and categories by their IDs as well as the most
recent event type observed in the session
References
Adomavicius, G., Kwon, Y .O.: Improving aggregate recommendation diversity using ranking-based tech-
niques. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 24(5), 896–911 (2011)
Afchar, D., Melchiorre, A.B., Schedl, M., Hennequin, R., Epure, E.V ., Moussallam, M.D.: Explainability
in music recommender systems. (2022) arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.10528
Ben-Shimon, D., Tsikinovsky, A., Friedmann, M., Shapira, B., Rokach, L., Hoerle, J.: Recsys challenge
2015 and the YOOCHOOSE dataset. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Recommender
Systems, RecSys 2015, pp. 357–358 (2015)
Burke, R.: Hybrid recommender systems: survey and experiments. User Model. User-Adap. Inter. 12(4),
331–370 (2002)
Chen, H., Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.-I.: Explaining a series of models by propagating shapley values. Nature
Commun. 13(1), 4512 (2022)
Chen, S., Moore, J.L., Turnbull, D., Joachims, T.: Playlist prediction via metric embedding. In Proceedings
of the 18th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD
’12, pp. 714–722 (2012)
Gabriel De Souza, P .M., Jannach, D., Da-Cunha, A.M.: Contextual hybrid session-based news recommen-
dation with recurrent neural networks. IEEE Access 7, 169185–169203 (2019)
Garcin, F., Dimitrakakis, C., Faltings, B.: Personalized news recommendation with context trees. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACM Confererence on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’13, pp. 105–112 (2013)
Geng, C., Wu, H., Fang, H.: Causality and correlation graph modeling for effective and explainable session-
based recommendation. (2022) arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.10782
Hariri, N., Mobasher, B., Burke, R.: Context-aware music recommendation based on latent topic sequential
patterns. In Proceedings of the Sixth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’12, pp.
131–131 (2012)
123

726 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J.: The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and
Prediction. Springer Science & Business Media, Berlin (2009)
Hidasi, B., Karatzoglou, A., Baltrunas, L., Tikk, D.: Session-based recommendations with recurrent neural
networks. In Proceedings International Conference on Learning Representatinos, ICLR ’16, (2016)
Hidasi, B., Quadrana, M., Karatzoglou, A., Tikk, D.: Parallel recurrent neural network architectures for
feature-rich session-based recommendations. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference on recom-
mender systems, pp. 241–248 (2016)
Liang, H., Chen, Q., Zhao, H., Jian, S., Cao, L., Cao, J.: Neural cross-session ﬁltering: next-item prediction
under intra- and inter-session context. IEEE Intell. Syst. 33(6), 57–67 (2018)
Jannach, D., Jugovac, M.: Measuring the business value of recommender systems. ACM Trans. Manage.
Inf. Syst. 10(4), 1–23 (2019)
Jannach, D., Lerche, L., Jugovac, M.: Adaptation and evaluation of recommendations for short-term shop-
ping goals. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’15, pp.
211–218 (2015)
Jannach, D., Ludewig, M., Lerche, L.: Session-based item recommendation in e-commerce: on short-term
intents, reminders, trends and discounts. User Model. User-Adap. Inter. 27(3), 351–392 (2017)
Jannach, D., Quadrana, M., Cremonesi, P .: Session-based recommendation. In: Ricci, F., Shapira, B.,
Rokach, L. (eds.) Recommender Systems Handbook. Springer, US (2021)
Kang, W.-C., McAuley, J.: Self-attentive sequential recommendation. In 2018 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 197–206 (2018)
Ke, G., Meng, Q., Finley, T., Wang, T., Chen, W., Ma, W., Y e, Q., Liu, T.-Y .: Lightgbm: a highly efﬁcient
gradient boosting decision tree. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 30, 3146–3154 (2017)
Kouki, P ., Fountalis, I., V asiloglou, N., Cui, X., Liberty, E., Al Jadda, K.: From the lab to production: a
case study of session-based recommendations in the home-improvement domain. In Fourteenth ACM
Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’20, pp. 140–149, (2020)
Latiﬁ, S., Mauro, N., Jannach, D.: Session-aware recommendation: a surprising quest for the state-of-the-art.
Inf. Sci. 573, 291–315 (2021)
Li, J., Ren, P ., Chen, Z., Ren, Z., Lian, T., Ma, J.: Neural attentive session-based recommendation. In
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM
’17, pp. 1419–1428 (2017)
Liu, Q., Zeng, Y ., Mokhosi, R., Zhang, H.: STAMP: short-term attention/memory priority model for
session-based recommendation. In Proceedings ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’18, pp. 1831–1839 (2018)
Ludewig, M., Jannach, D.: Evaluation of session-based recommendation algorithms. User Model. User-
Adap. Inter. 28(4–5), 331–390 (2018)
Ludewig, M., Mauro, N., Latiﬁ, S., Jannach, D.: Empirical analysis of session-based recommendation
algorithms. User Model. User-Adap. Inter. 31(1), 149–181 (2021)
Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.I.: A uniﬁed approach to interpreting model predictions. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, pp. 4765–4774 (2017)
Lundberg, S.M., et al.: From local explanations to global understanding with explainable ai for trees. Nature
Mach. Intell. 2(1), 56–67 (2020)
Misztal-Radecka, J., Indurkhya, B.: Bias-aware hierarchical clustering for detecting the discriminated
groups of users in recommendation systems. Inf. Process. Manage. 58(3), 102519 (2021)
Mobasher, B., Dai, H., Luo, T., Nakagawa, M.: Using sequential and non-sequential patterns in predictive
web usage mining tasks. In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, ICDM
’02, pp. 669–672 (2002)
Phuong, T.M., Thanh, T.C., Bach, N.X.: Combining user-based and session-based recommendations with
recurrent neural networks. In International Conference on Neural Information Processing, pp. 487–
498. Springer, Berlin (2018)
Phuong, T.M., Thanh, T.C., Bach, N.X.: Neural session-aware recommendation. IEEE Access 7, 86884–
86896 (2019)
Quadrana, M., Cremonesi, P ., Jannach, D.: Sequence-aware recommender systems. ACM Comput. Surv.
51, 1–36 (2018)
Quadrana, M., Karatzoglou, A., Hidasi, B., Cremonesi, P .: Personalizing session-based recommendations
with hierarchical recurrent neural networks. In proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems, pp. 130–137 (2017)
123

Hybrid session-aware recommendation with feature-based models 727
Ragno, R., Burges, C.J.C., Herley, C.: Inferring similarity between music objects with application to playlist
generation. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGMM International Workshop on Multimedia Informa-
tion Retrieval, MIR ’05, pp. 73–80 (2005)
Ren, P ., Chen, Z., Li, J., Ren, Z., Ma, J., de Rijke, M.: Repeatnet: A repeat aware neural recommendation
machine for session-based recommendation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pp. 4806–4813 (2019)
Roberts, C.V ., Elahi, E., Chandrashekar, A.: On the bias-variance characteristics of lime and shap in high
sparsity movie recommendation explanation tasks. (2022) arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04784
Sánchez Rodríguez, J.A., Wu, J.-C., Khandwawala, M.: Two-stage session-based recommendations with
candidate rank embeddings. In Fashion Recommender Systems, pp. 49–66. Springer, Berlin (2020)
Ruocco, M., Lillestøl Skrede, O.S., Langseth, H.: Inter-session modeling for session-based recommendation.
In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Deep Learning for Recommender Systems, DLRS 2017, pp.
24–31, (2017)
Sachdeva, N., Manco, G., Ritacco, E., Pudi, V .: Sequential variational autoencoders for collaborative ﬁlter-
ing. In Proceedings of the Twelfth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining,
WSDM ’19, pp. 600–608 (2019)
Shani, G., Heckerman, D., Brafman, R.I.: An MDP-based recommender system. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 6,
1265–1295 (2005)
Song, B., Cao, Y ., Zhang, W., Xu, C.: Session-based recommendation with hierarchical memory networks. In
Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,
pp. 2181–2184 (2019)
Song, Y ., Lee, J.-G.: Augmenting recurrent neural networks with high-order user-contextual preference for
session-based recommendation. (2018) arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.02983
Sun, F., Liu, J., Wu, J., Pei, C., Lin, X., Ou, W., Jiang, P .: BERT4Rec: sequential recommendation with
bidirectional encoder representations from transformer. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 1441–1450 (2019)
Tavakol, M., Brefeld, U.: Factored MDPs for detecting topics of user sessions. In Proceedings of the 8th
ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’14, pp. 33–40 (2014)
Tavakol, M., Brefeld, U.: Factored mdps for detecting topics of user sessions. In Proceedings of the 8th
ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, pp. 33–40 (2014)
Ukil, A., Marin, L., Jara, A.J.: When less is more powerful: shapley value attributed ablation with augmented
learning for practical time series sensor data classiﬁcation. Plos one 17(11), e0277975 (2022)
Wang, M., Ren, P ., Mei, L., Chen, Z., Ma, J., de Rijke, M.: A collaborative session-based recommenda-
tion approach with parallel memory modules. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’19, pp. 345–354 (2019)
Wang, S., Cao, L., Wang, Y ., Sheng, Q.Z., Orgun, M.A., Lian, D.: A survey on session-based recommender
systems. ACM Comput. Surv. 54(7), 1–38 (2021)
Wu, S., Tang, Y ., Zhu, Y ., Wang, L., Xie, X., Tan, T.: Session-based recommendation with graph neural
networks. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI, pp.
346–353 (2019)
Ying, H., Zhuang, F., Zhang, F., Liu, Y ., Xu, G., Xie, X., Xiong, H., Wu, J.: Sequential recommender system
based on hierarchical attention network. In Proceedings of the 27th International Joint Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI’18, pp. 3926-3932. AAAI Press, (2018)
Y u, F., Zhu, Y ., Liu, Q., Wu, S., Wang, L., Tan, T.: TAGNN: target attentive graph neural networks for
session-based recommendation. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’20, (2020)
Y uan, F., Karatzoglou, A., Arapakis, I., Jose, J.M., He, X.: A simple convolutional generative network for
next item recommendation. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining, WSDM ’19, pp. 582–590 (2019)
Zhu, N., Cao, J., Liu, Y ., Y ang, Y ., Ying, H., Xiong, H.: Sequential modeling of hierarchical user intention
and preference for next-item recommendation. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 807–815 (2020)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
123

728 J. Bauer, D. Jannach
Josef Bauer studied mathematics and is currently a PhD student at University of Klagenfurt, Austria. He
worked on various machine learning problems, including recommender systems.
Dietmar Jannach is a Professor of Computer Science at University of Klagenfurt, Austria. He has worked
on different areas of artiﬁcial intelligence, including recommender systems, model-based diagnosis, and
knowledge-based systems. He is the leading author of a textbook on recommender systems and has
authored more than hundred research papers, focusing on the application of artiﬁcial intelligence tech-
nology to practical problems.
123